<h3><a id="THE_CHIMNEY-SWEEPERS_WIFE"/>THE CHIMNEY-SWEEPER’S WIFE</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">T</span>HIS is a grim and sad story. I heard it told more than once in my
childhood, and it made me wonder and shudder.</p>
<p>In a side street stands an old middle-class house with a smooth gray
façade. Through a large round-arched door without any decorations—there
is, to be sure, a date, and perhaps too a couple of garlands with
fruit—one comes upon a narrow courtyard paved with cobblestones, and a
dark, stone-paved fountain like so many of its kind, where the sun never
strikes the path. An old linden with pollarded branches, blackened bark,
and leafage thinned with age stands in one corner; it is as old as the
house, older indeed, and is always a favorite resort for the children
and cats of the courtyard.</p>
<p>This was of old the yard of Wetzmann, the master chimney-sweep.</p>
<p>Sweeper Wetzmann must have been a very good-natured old fellow. He had
had success in life and had got together quite a large property. He was
kind to the poor, harsh to his prentices—for such was the custom; so
perhaps it needed to be, too—and drank toddy in the tavern every
evening, for he had a poor life at home.</p>
<p>His wife was likewise harsh to the prentices, but she was not kind to
the poor or to anyone else either. She had worked as maid-servant in
sweeper Wetzmann’s house before she became his second wife. At that time
Envy and Lust were the two of the seven deadly sins which were nearest
her nature; now it was rather Wrath and Pride.</p>
<p>She was large and strongly built and in her earlier days must have been
handsome.</p>
<p>The son Frederick was slim and pale. He was born of the first marriage,
and it was said that he resembled his mother. He had a good head and a
cheerful disposition, and was studying to be a minister. He had just
become a student when he fell into a long and severe illness which held
him to his bed a whole winter.</p>
<p>In a wing of the court lived a charwoman with her daughter Magda. Was
her name really Magda? I do not know, but I always called her so to
myself when as a child I heard the older people tell of her on a winter
evening in the twilight; and I pictured to myself a pale, shy little
child’s face, flooded about with an abundance of bright hair, and with a
very red mouth. She was fifteen and had just been confirmed. Perhaps it
was that “being confirmed” which made me represent her to myself as
serious and quiet, like the young girls I used to see in church on
Sunday, and which caused me to think of her as clad in a long shiny
black dress.</p>
<p>In the spring, when the student began to convalesce, the charwoman’s
daughter came by his desire to sit at his bedside a while in the
afternoon and read aloud.</p>
<p>Mrs. Wetzmann did not approve of this. She was afraid a liking might
grow up between them. Her stepson, for all she cared, might fall in love
with whomsoever he wished and might betroth himself, too—that did not
concern her; but at least it must not be with a charwoman’s daughter!
She kept a mistrustful eye on Magda, but had to put up with the
arrangement. An invalid should of course be diverted in some way or
other; and the doctor had forbidden him to read in bed, because he had
weak eyes and was not to overstrain himself.</p>
<p>So the girl sat by his bedside and read aloud both religious and secular
books, and the student lay there pale and weak, listening to her voice
and looking at her, too, in which he found pleasure.</p>
<p>Such a red mouth she had!</p>
<p>They were nearly of the same age—he was not over seventeen or
eighteen—and they had often played together as children. Soon enough
they grew confidential.
<p>As often as possible Mrs. Wetzmann found some excuse to go into the
sick-room to see how things were getting on there. The two young folks
ought to have noticed this and been on their guard; but then one does
not always do as one ought. One day, when she noiselessly and cautiously
opened the door, matters were in the following state: Magda had left her
chair, which had been set at some distance from the bed, and now stood
leaning over the head-board with her arms around the young man’s neck.
He in turn had raised himself half up with his elbows propped on the
pillow and was caressing her hair with a thin white hand, while they
kissed each other fervently. From time to time, also, they whispered
certain broken words without meaning.</p>
<p>The sweeper’s wife grew dark red. Notwithstanding, she could not keep
from smiling inwardly: hadn’t everything turned out exactly as she knew
it would! But now there was going to be an end to it. Wrath and Pride
rose up within her, till they swelled and glowed from her cheeks and
eyes, which sent out sparks; and who knows—while she stood there silent
and unseen, regarding the two young people, who had neither eyes nor
ears for anything but each other—who knows if Envy and Lust, too, did
not covertly slink forth from their retreat and play each on its own
hidden string within her soul?
<p>She did not reflect long, but stepped hastily forward to the bed, seized
the girl’s slender wrist in an iron grasp, gave her a disgraceful
epithet, and flung her out of the door with a stream of the foulest
abuse. Afterwards, in the interested presence of the servants and
prentices, she swore a solemn and luscious oath that if the young girl
ever again dared to set foot within her threshold, she should get her
skin full of so many blows that she would not be able to stir a fin for
fourteen days.</p>
<p>There was no one who doubted that she meant to keep her word.</p>
<p>The invalid made no reproaches to his stepmother. Every time she went
through the room he turned his face to the wall; he did not wish to see
or speak to her after her performance with Magda. But one day he
confided to his father in private that he could not live unless Magda
might be his bride. The old chimney-sweeper was surprised and vexed, but
dared not immediately set up any serious opposition: his son was the one
person he cared for and who showed him any tenderness in return, and he
could not endure the thought of losing him.</p>
<p>He put the matter aside for future action and gave his wife a share in
his anxiety.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>How can I describe what occurred next? It sounds like an evil dream or
a story made to frighten children when they are naughty, and yet it is
true.</p>
<p>It is supposed to have been on a Sunday evening in May that it happened.</p>
<p>The courtyard is still, the street is still. Maybe someone hums a song
through a kitchen window, or some children play down in the alley....
The invalid is alone in his room. He is counting the quarter-hours and
the minutes. It is spring outside now. Soon it will be summer. Shall he
never get up from his bed, never again hear the woods murmur and rustle,
never as before be able to measure the day in periods of activity and
periods of rest? And Magda.... If only he did not always see before him
her face with the wild alarm in her look that came there when his
stepmother seized her by the wrist! She had not needed to be afraid. The
wicked woman would not have dared to do her any serious harm, for she
knew that he had chosen her for his bride.</p>
<p>So he lies there dreaming, now awake, now half-awake, while he lets his
pupils suck in the light of the sunbeam on the white door. When he shuts
his eyes, there swims out an archipelago of poisonously green islands
surrounded by an inky black sea. And as he dozes, the green passes over
into blue, the black brightens to bluish red with ragged dark edges,
and at last everything grows black together....</p>
<p>He feels a light hand stroking his forehead, and he starts up in bed.</p>
<p>It is Magda. Magda stands before him, small and slender, with a smiling
red mouth, and lays a bunch of spring flowers in front of him on the
cover. Anemones and almond blossoms and violets.</p>
<p>Is it true, is it really she?</p>
<p>“How did you dare?” he whispers.</p>
<p>“Your stepmother is away,” she answers. “I saw her go just now, dressed
to go out. I heard she was to go to South Stockholm, and it will surely
be long before she comes home. So then I slipped up the stairs and in to
you.”</p>
<p>She stays a long while with him, telling of the woods where she has
walked alone and listened to the birds and picked spring flowers for him
whom she loves. And they kiss each other as often as possible and caress
like two children, and both are happy, while the hours run and the
sunbeam on the floor becomes burning gold and then red, then pales and
fades away.</p>
<p>“Perhaps you ought to go,” says Frederick. “She may soon be home. What
should I do if she wanted to beat you, I who am lying here sick and
weak, who grow dizzy if I get up out of bed. Perhaps you ought to go.”</p>
<p>“I’m not afraid,” says Magda.</p>
<p>For she wants to show unmistakably that she loves him and that she will
gladly suffer for her love’s sake.</p>
<p>Only when twilight comes does she kiss him for the last time and steal
out of the house. She stops a minute in the courtyard and looks up at
the window of the room where he is lying with her almond blossoms and
violets on the bed-cover. When she turns to the little room in the wing
of the court, she stands face to face with Mrs. Wetzmann, and she utters
a little scream.</p>
<p>There is no living human being in the courtyard, none but these two.
Round about stand the walls, staring at them in the darkness with empty,
black windows, and the old linden trembles in its corner.</p>
<p>“You’ve been up there!” says the sweeper’s wife.</p>
<p>As a child I always believed that she smiled when she said this, and
that her teeth shone as white in the darkness as those of her husband’s
prentices.</p>
<p>“Yes, I have been with him,” Magda may perhaps have answered, defiant
and erect even in her chalk-pale terror.</p>
<p>What happened then? No one really knows, but probably there was a
desperate pursuit round the courtyard. At the foot of the old linden
the girl tripped and fell. She dared not call for help, for fear the
invalid might hear; and besides, who would have helped her? Her mother
was away at work. The infuriated woman was above her—she had meanwhile
got hold of a weapon, a broomstick or something of the sort,—and blow
followed blow. A couple of half-strangled screams from a throat
constricted by the dread of death, and then nothing more.</p>
<p>A couple of prentices who had just come home stood down in the dark
doorway and looked on; they did not move a finger to help the girl.
Perhaps they did not dare; perhaps, too, they were led by a faint hope
of seeing their mistress carried off in a police wagon some day.</p>
<p>When Mrs. Wetzmann went into the house after exercising her right of
mastery—for she felt by instinct that she naturally had proprietary
right to all over whom she could and would exercise it—she stumbled
against something soft in the stairway. It was Frederick. He had heard
the faint screams, had sprung from bed and gone out, and had fallen on
the stairs.</p>
<p>Magda lived three days; she then died and was buried.</p>
<p>Sweeper Wetzmann paid a sum of money to the charwoman, her mother, and
there were no legal proceedings on the matter. Nevertheless the old man
took it hard. He went no more to the tavern to drink toddy, but
generally sat at home in a leather-covered chair and spelled in an old
Bible. He fell into a decline, grew silent and peculiar, and it was not
a year before he too was dead and laid in earth.</p>
<p>The son Frederick grew slowly better; but he never passed his
examination as minister, for both his grasp of intellect and his memory
had become weakened. He was often seen going with flowers to Magda’s
grave; he walked leaning forward and very rapidly, indeed he almost ran,
as if he had many important errands to attend to, and he mostly had a
couple of books under his arm. To the end he remained wholly
weak-minded.</p>
<p>And the sweeper’s wife? She seems to have had a strong nature. There are
people who are not exactly conscienceless, but who never of their own
accord hit upon the idea that they have done anything wrong. It may
happen that a fellow with bright buttons on his coat may clap them on
the shoulder and request them to come along with him; then their
conscience awakens. But no one came to Mrs. Wetzmann. She sent her
stepson to an asylum when he became too troublesome at home, she mourned
her husband, as was proper and customary, and then she married again.
When she drove to church on the bridal day, she wore a jacket of
lilac-colored silk with gold braid and was “fixed up fit to kill”—so
said my grandmother, who was sitting at her window in the house
opposite and saw the whole display while she was turning a leaf in her
book of sermons.
<h3><a id="BLOOM"/>BLOOM</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">O</span>N a brilliant August morning at eight o’clock precisely the gates of
the establishment of Langholm were opened for three boarders of the
establishment, who had come there for various causes and sojourned for
various periods. These periods were exactly suited to the grade and kind
of their differences with the law-abiding community as proved by their
conduct. They did not know each other, and having no feeling of
brotherhood through their common misfortune, they said to one another
neither good-morning nor good-bye.</p>
<p>The man who came out first was a thick-set fellow with a beast-like
forehead and heavy wrists. One dark evening he had fallen upon an old
workman whom he did not like, knocked out some of his teeth, and kicked
him in the chest so that he coughed blood for several days. He had been
given a month for assault and battery, which did him little harm, and he
betook himself hastily to the nearest tavern.</p>
<p>Next came a man who had swindled an impersonal entity known as a bank of
a fairly large sum of money. The three months he had spent indoors had
not overly bleached his fresh brandy complexion. He had a well-fitting
summer suit of dark blue with narrow white edgings; on his feet he wore
new yellow shoes, and in his hand he held an elegant little satchel of
the same color as the shoes, so that he most nearly resembled a
traveling salesman who comes whistling softly out of a hotel. He did
not, however, whistle, but mounted into a cab with a lowered hood, under
which a black-clad woman with pale and anxious features awaited him. He
then tossed an address to the coachman, and vanished in a cloud of dust.</p>
<p>Last came the former tailor’s apprentice Bloom, Oscar Valdemar Napoleon.
His complexion inclined more to gray, for he had had to atone with a
nine months’ sentence for the theft of a jacket hung out for show—this
being, to be sure, his second trip to the establishment. He had in his
right breast pocket, besides his birth certificate with its less
flattering annotations, the sum of eighty crowns inserted in a blue
envelope, together with a certificate of good conduct at Langholm from
the prison director.</p>
<p>That was not much to represent nine months’ work, but he had also had
his board and lodging meanwhile. For him it was in any case a
considerable sum, and it had been besides a lever for many future plans,
most of which rested on clear improbabilities, for many dreams of a new
life, for happiness and prosperity and general respect. This had been
especially the case during those last weeks when, in consideration of
his rapidly approaching freedom, he had been spared the humiliation of
being shaved, for he had felt his manly self-esteem sprout afresh and
grow in rivalry with the bristles on his upper lip and chin. But now,
when he was actually free, when he felt the light, cool breeze of the
summer morning fan about his temples and heard it rustling in the big
trees, all of these plans were pushed somewhat into the background as if
of themselves, of course only until a later time, only for a few hours
or perhaps a day, and a single great emotion of happiness rose up in him
and swept him along as though in a vertigo. Furthermore he was very
hungry, because he had hardly touched his Langholm fare on that last
morning, and he thought with yearning and satisfaction of a little
restaurant on Brenchurch Street which he knew from of old, and of a
great beefsteak with onions and one or maybe two bottles of beer—only
think of it, beer!</p>
<p>On the Langholm Bridge stood a guard off duty, fishing for roach with
small bits of saffron bread. Bloom stood with his arms on the railing
and watched: it amused him to pretend that he was not in a hurry. Down
there in the deep green of the quiet water, in the shadow under the
bridge, big red-eyed roach swam back and forth around the bait, pointing
at it a while, turning around in hesitation and coming back again; now
and then came a rudd or two with red fins and yellow back, beautiful
fish, but tasting a little of clay, and once in a while came a glint
from the broad silver side of a bream. On both sides of the narrow
Langholm Bay large bending willows dipped their gray-green leaves into
the water, and the reeds waved gently in the morning wind. In the
background far away, the churches and towers of Stockholm stood in the
blue sun-haze as if cut with a fine needle.</p>
<p>“Yes,” remarked Bloom to the guard, “now one can begin to live again.”</p>
<p>“Yes, good luck to you, Bloom!” answered the guard without taking his
eyes from the float, which just then took a dip under the water. “That
was a bite, but the fish only took the bread and left the hook to the
landlord.”</p>
<p>A steam sloop came sputtering up under the bridge on its way to the city
and lay to at the nearest landing. For a moment Bloom was tempted to go
with it, but came back directly to his first idea: the restaurant on
Brenchurch Street, beefsteak, onions and beer, so he said good-bye to
the guard and went ahead on the Langholm Road. He felt himself from of
old most at home in the section of South Stockholm between
Skinnarviksberg, Lilyholm Bridge and Langholm.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>When Bloom emerged, full-fed and contented, from his restaurant, his
first impulse was to buy a new black felt hat, for the old one inclined
too much to yellow-brown, and he had heard sometime or other that the
hat makes the gentleman. After that he went to the nearest barber shop
on Horn Street and had them remove the stubble from his chin, together
with part of that on his cheeks; retaining, however—besides his
mustaches, of course—a couple of small mutton-chop whiskers next the
ears. After that he went slantwise across the street to a general
outfitter’s, whence he came out attired in a clean white collar, a
blue-edged dickey, and a brilliant light-blue necktie. A few steps
further up the street he stopped before a photographer’s show-case and
looked at himself in the glass. He was greatly moved at the
transformation he had undergone. A ribbon-like strip of paper was
picturesquely wound among portraits of serving-maids, dressmakers,
Salvation Army soldiers, recruits, and a parson with a parson’s collar;
and when he read on this that he could have half-a-dozen card-sized
pictures made for two and a half crowns, he felt an irresistible
temptation to go up and be photographed. It was partly that the day was
significant for him, so that the likeness he had taken now would be a
memento for the rest of his life; partly, too, that he had a dark
foreboding, which he tried to put by, that it might be long before he
would again be in a condition equally worthy to be immortalized in a
picture. Furthermore, he had had himself photographed at various times
previously, and he remembered with satisfaction the agreeable feeling he
had experienced in seeing his ego in an, as it were, glorified aspect,
without spots on his coat or damaging inequalities in his complexion,
handsomely shaved and with a dignified and engaging expression. He went
up to the photographer, combed his hair solicitously before a mirror,
and sat down motionless before the camera with his hands on his knees.</p>
<p>“Will it be good?” he asked, when the sitting was over.</p>
<p>“The gentleman will look like a bank director,” answered the
photographer after he had glanced at the plate.</p>
<p>When he stood on the street again, he became conscious of his good
intentions calling more strongly and clearly than before. He ought to go
down to the city, look up a couple of God-fearing and kindly people to
whom the prison director and the pastor had given him directions, get
work, and procure himself a cheap lodging. But it was still early in the
day, the clock-maker’s time-piece over there on the corner did not yet
point quite to ten, the sun shone heart-warmingly in the blue heavens,
and the air was mild and still. He could give himself a little time, he
could go a piece toward Lilyholm out in the woods.</p>
<p>Yes, the woods—he had thought of them many times while he sat caged off
there behind the grating.</p>
<p>He had grown up in a village on a wooded slope half a mile south of
Stockholm. After he had been confirmed, he had been set as prentice to a
pious little tailor in South Stockholm. The tailor was a Baptist; Bloom
also became a Baptist and submitted to total immersion. But when he went
to another tailor, who belonged to the national church and constantly
misused the name of the Devil, his new faith gradually waned. He made
new acquaintances and became the betrothed of a middle-aged serving-maid
who had a bank-book and gave him money. In that way he grew accustomed
to amusements, not great, but nevertheless more than are good for poor
folks. On fine summer evenings he often sat in Mosebacke’s café or on
the river terrace drinking punch, sometimes with his intended, but
sometimes with a little dark-haired dressmaker, whom he had got to know
at Tekla’s one afternoon when she had given a tea in the maid’s room.
She was called Edith; she had thick dark hair and very red lips. She
went for long periods without work, but always knew how to provide for
herself notwithstanding. Bloom often wished that Tekla’s faithful love
for him, together with her bank-book, might by some magic means be
transferred to Edith. But Edith’s heart was inconstant and never to be
relied upon, and the bank-book still remained Tekla’s. So, as the case
was, he at least got a little enjoyment from the money of the one and
the red lips of the other.</p>
<p>But then came the end. The tailor with whom he worked went bankrupt, and
he was out of work. Tekla promised to help him and took out money from
the bank; he was to have the loan of thirty crowns till he found work.
On the evening when he was to get the money she forced him to stay
longer than he cared to, and when at last he was to go and only waited
for the money, the crash came. She was all the more angry because she
had to speak low for fear of waking the family. Edith had been up in her
room that afternoon, they had fallen out about something, and Edith had
talked about all manner of things with Bloom to spite and annoy her. But
Tekla was not the kind to let anybody make fun of her. She called him a
cur and many other names, waving the three tenners under his nose and
declaring that he should never again get a farthing from her. Thereupon
he snatched them with a sudden grab and went off. He knew that she dared
not make any disturbance at night; the family might wake.</p>
<p>But next day in court she accused him of theft. He first denied it, but
afterwards confessed and related the circumstances. The plaintiff’s
version of the affair, however, was altogether different: the thirty
crowns had lain on the table, he had taken them without her seeing it,
and she had never promised them to him. The one thing that became wholly
clear was that he had taken them.</p>
<p>That gave him his first trip.</p>
<p>Afterwards he had lived as best he could—had worked sometimes, and
sometimes starved and begged, till one evening he got the idea of
stealing a jacket on East Street so as to escape the poor-house.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>He had come down to Lilyholm Bridge. Milk-wagons rattled and shaggy
peasant horses toiled painfully with their home-made carts up the steep
abutment. From the hundred factory chimneys around the shore of Arstavik
the smoke ascended quietly toward the welkin in straight columns, as
from a sacrifice well-pleasing to the Lord. The Continental Express
rushed southward along the railway embankment, its dining car full of
breakfasting travelers with anchovies on their forks. But in the
peaceful nook between the bridge and the shore a family of ducks swam to
and fro; some white, some speckled with the suggestion of a wild duck’s
plumage, while in the middle of the flock the drake stood on a floating
plank on one foot with his head under his wing, asleep.</p>
<p>Bloom took a roll that he had brought with him from the restaurant on
Brenchurch Street, crumbled it to pieces, and threw the pieces to the
ducks. The flock at once grew more lively; even the drake lifted his
head and opened one eye, but shut it again. He was quite white, and his
shut eyelid was also white, so that Bloom had to think of the blank,
uncanny marble eyes he had seen in the National Museum one Sunday many
years ago. The others snapped among the bits of roll. One of them had
got hold of a piece that was too big, so she dipped it into the water
time after time in order to soften it and break it. Meanwhile another
followed all her motions constantly with watchful eyes, and when at last
the bit of roll slipped from the bill of the first, the other was
instantly there and got it. There was no conflict; the first contented
herself with following in turn and watching for a chance to recover the
lost piece.</p>
<p>Bloom laughed aloud with delight.</p>
<p>Yes, that’s right, he thought; he who has got something must look out
for what he has, or someone else will come and take it. He felt it
almost as a consolation to see the innocent white creature perform with
impunity and entire naturalness an act which in the language of mankind
is known as theft, and for which he had had to suffer severely.</p>
<p>A speckled duck, enticed by the bits of roll, came swimming out from the
shore at the apex of a flock of little ones, gray-brown fellows with
hairy fluff and small, black, pearly-bright eyes like rats. Several
small girls on the way to school with books in their hands stopped and
surveyed them with delight and astonishment. “Look there! are those
rats?” “No, can’t you see? They’re birds.” “Only think, they aren’t
afraid of the water!”</p>
<p>“Those are ducklings,” explained Bloom, adding a didactic tone: “They
are formed to go in the water. It’s no more remarkable for them to go in
the water than for fish to swim.”</p>
<p>“Really!” said the largest girl. And they bounded off on their way with
little skips.</p>
<p>Bloom recalled a story which he had once read in a school book about an
ugly duckling that was transformed into a swan. He sought for an
application of this to himself and partly found it in his recent
transformation at the barber shop and the photographer’s, but it did
not seem to him fully satisfactory, and he muttered to himself as he
passed on over the bridge: “Wait, I’ll show them! Just wait.”</p>
<p>It was very warm, and when he came to the other side of the bridge where
nettles and burdocks were standing, gray with dust, by the edge of the
road, he took off his jacket, stuck the crook of his stick through the
loop, slung it over his shoulder, and went on out along the Lilyholm
Road whistling a cheerful tune.</p>
<p>A little in front of him went a young woman with a bundle in her hand,
and he hurried his steps so as to see how she looked from in front. As
he came nearer, all at once his heart nearly stood still in his breast,
for he thought it must be Edith. At the same moment she turned.</p>
<p>“No, if it isn’t Valdemar!”</p>
<p>After the first expression of surprise had vanished from her face, she
smiled affably and seemed not unpleasantly affected at seeing him. She
was going to see an acquaintance who lived a little further out, and
they went on together. He found her changed, fuller than before and
redder in complexion, as if she had drunk a good deal of beer. She asked
where he had been all the long time that they had not seen each other.
He felt a certain satisfaction in her not seeming to know of his
“second trip,” and he improvised something about a lengthy illness and
employment for a while with a tailor in a neighboring town.</p>
<p>Edith chattered incessantly. She talked of common acquaintances and
lamented over wrongs she had suffered. Tekla had been worst of all to
her. But now she was married to a street-cleaner who had already drunk
up her money and who beat her every day; and it served her right. She
related besides a great deal about herself, but in a style that hardly
seemed to make any pretence to veracity.</p>
<p>Bloom let her prattle and for his own part did not say much. He thought
of the nine months he had spent in solitude.</p>
<p>He took her gently by the arm and guided her in on a path that led into
the wood, and she grew silent in the midst of her talk and followed him
without saying anything. The path led into a deep covert along a fence
and hedge that enclosed a solitary orchard. From this orchard several
big silver poplars spread their wide and lofty crowns. On the other side
rose a fir-clad slope with mosses and ferns and dusky thickets. Over the
tops of the firs a white summer cloud sailed slowly.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>Bloom was awakened by a big raindrop which fell heavily on his right
eyelid. He half raised himself and rubbed his eyes—had he been asleep?
He was alone, and it was raining. It did not rain hard as yet; these
were only the first big drops, but a black cloud was hanging directly
over him.</p>
<p>Where was Edith?</p>
<p>He had thrown his jacket with the stick a little to one side; he got up
and put it on. Suddenly a horrible thought came over him and he made a
swift grab at the breast pocket.</p>
<p>It was empty. The blue envelope was gone—the envelope with the money
and the prison director’s recommendations.</p>
<p>He felt a choking in his throat and a difficulty in breathing.</p>
<p>A sudden gust of wind shot through the leafage of the poplars like a
lightning flash, and a raging squall of rain whipped him in the face.
<h3><a id="THE_FUR_COAT"/>THE FUR COAT</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">I</span>T was a cold winter that year. People shrank up in the chill and grew
smaller, all except those who had furs. Judge Richardt had a big fur
coat. It almost belonged, moreover, to his official position, for he was
managing director of a brand-new company. His old friend Dr. Henck, on
the contrary, had no fur coat: he had instead a pretty wife and three
children. Dr. Henck was thin and pale. Some people grow fat with
marriage, others grow thin. Dr. Henck had grown thin, and remained so on
this particular Christmas Eve.</p>
<p>I’ve had a bad year this year, said Dr. Henck to himself, as he was on
his way to his old friend John Richardt to borrow money. It was three
o’clock of Christmas Eve, just the hour of the mid-day twilight.—I’ve
had a very bad year. My health is fragile, not to say broken. My
patients, on the contrary, have picked up, almost the whole lot of them,
I see them so seldom nowadays. Presumably I’m going to die soon. My wife
thinks so, too; I’ve seen it in her looks. In such a case it would be
desirable that the event should happen before the end of January, when
the cursed life insurance premium has to be paid.</p>
<p>By the time he had reached this point in the process of his thoughts he
found himself on the corner of Government and Harbor Street. As he was
about to pass the street-crossing in order to proceed down Government
Street, he slipped on a smooth sleigh track and fell, and at the same
moment a sleigh drove up at full speed. The driver swore and the horse
instinctively turned aside, but Dr. Henck received a blow on the
shoulder from one of the runners, and furthermore a screw or nail or
some similar projection caught his overcoat and tore a big rent in it.
People gathered around him. A policeman helped him to his feet, a young
girl brushed the snow off him, an old woman gesticulated over his torn
overcoat in a way that indicated she would have liked to sew it up on
the spot if she could, and a prince of the royal house, who happened to
be going by, picked up his cap and set it on his head. So everything was
all right again except the coat.</p>
<p>“Lord! what a sight you are, Gustav,” said Judge Richardt, when Henck
came up to his office.</p>
<p>“Yes, I’ve been run over,” answered Henck.</p>
<p>“That’s just like you,” said Richardt, laughing good-humoredly. “But you
can’t go home like that. You may gladly have the loan of my fur coat,
and I’ll send a boy home after my ulster.”</p>
<p>“Thanks,” said Dr. Henck. And after he had borrowed the hundred krona he
needed, he added, “We shall be glad to have you for dinner.”</p>
<p>Richardt was a bachelor and was accustomed to spend Christmas Eve with
Henck.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>On the way home Henck was in a better humor than he had been for a long
time.</p>
<p>That’s on account of the fur coat, he said to himself. If I had been
smart, I should have got myself a fur coat on credit long ago. It would
have strengthened my self-esteem and raised me in the popular opinion.
One can’t pay such a small fee to a doctor in a fur coat as to a doctor
in an ordinary overcoat with worn button-holes. It’s a bother that I
didn’t happen to think of that before. Now it’s too late.</p>
<p>He walked a stretch through King’s Garden. It was dark already, it had
begun to snow again, and the acquaintances he met did not recognize him.</p>
<p>Who knows, though, whether it’s too late, Henck went on to himself. I’m
not old yet, and I may have been mistaken about the question of my
health. I’m poor as a little fox in the woods; but so was John Richardt
not so long since. My wife has grown cold and unfriendly toward me in
these latter times. She would surely begin to love me afresh, if I could
earn more money and if I were dressed in furs. It has seemed to me that
she cared more for John since he got himself a fur coat than she did
before. She was certainly a bit sweet on him when she was a young girl,
too; but he never courted her. On the contrary he said to her and to
everybody that he wouldn’t dare to marry on less than ten thousand a
year. But I dared, and Ellen was a poor girl who wanted to marry. I
don’t believe she was so much in love with me that I should have been
able to seduce her if I had wished to. But I didn’t want to, either; how
could I have dreamed of that sort of love? I haven’t thought of that
since I was sixteen and saw Faust the first time at the opera with
Arnoldson. I’m sure, though, she was fond of me when we were first
married; one can’t be mistaken about such a thing as that. Why couldn’t
she be again? In the first days after our marriage she always said
spiteful things to John whenever they met. But then he built up a
company, invited us often to the theatre, and got himself a fur coat.
And so naturally in time my wife grew tired of saying spiteful things to
him.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>Henck had still several errands to do before dinner. It was already half
past five when he came home laden with parcels. He felt very tender in
his left shoulder, otherwise there was nothing that reminded him of his
mishap in the afternoon except the fur coat.</p>
<p>It’ll be fun to see what my wife will do when she sees me in a fur coat,
said Dr. Henck to himself.</p>
<p>The hall was quite dark; the lamp was never lighted unless visitors were
expected.</p>
<p>I hear her in the parlor now, thought Dr. Henck. She walks as lightly as
a little bird. It’s remarkable that I still get warm around the heart
every time I hear her step in the next room.</p>
<p>Dr. Henck was right in his supposition that his wife would give him a
more loving reception when he had on a fur coat than she was otherwise
wont to do. She stole up close to him in the darkest corner of the hall,
twined her arms about his neck, and kissed him warmly and intensively.
Then she burrowed her head into the collar of his fur coat and
whispered: “Gustav isn’t home yet.”</p>
<p>“Yes,” answered Dr. Henck in a voice that trembled slightly, while he
caressed her hair with both hands, “yes, he’s home.”</p>
<p> </p>
<p>A big fire flamed in Dr. Henck’s work-room. Whisky and water stood on
the table.</p>
<p>Judge Richardt lay stretched out in a large leather easy-chair and
smoked a cigar. Dr. Henck sat huddled in a corner of the sofa. The door
was open on the hall, where Mrs. Henck and the children were busy
lighting the Christmas tree.</p>
<p>Dinner had been very quiet. Only the children had twittered and prattled
to one another and been happy.</p>
<p>“You’re not saying anything, old fellow,” said Richardt. “Is it that
you’re sitting worrying over your torn overcoat?”</p>
<p>“No,” answered Henck, “it’s rather over the fur coat.”</p>
<p>There was a few minutes’ silence before he continued:</p>
<p>“I’m thinking of something else, too. I’m sitting thinking that this is
the last Christmas we shall celebrate together. I’m a doctor and I know
I’ve not many days left. I know it now with full certainty. I want,
therefore, to thank you for all the kindness you’ve shown me and my wife
in these last times.”</p>
<p>“Oh, you’re mistaken,” muttered Richardt, looking away.</p>
<p>“No,” replied Henck, “I’m not mistaken. And I want also to thank you for
lending me your fur coat. It has given me the last seconds of happiness
I have known in my life.”</p>
<h3><a id="THE_BLUE_ANCHOR"/>THE BLUE ANCHOR</h3>
<h4>I</h4>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">T</span>HERE was dancing in the salon, but in the darkened smoking-room sat
several men who did not dance. The younger ones had white flowers in
their button-holes, the older ones had decorations. In the corner of a
sofa sat a man a little apart from the others; he sat very silent and
smiled as at a happy dream. His face was brown, but his forehead was
white. His frock coat was as correct as anyone else’s, and he had also a
white flower in his button-hole; but his left hand, which hung over the
arm of the sofa, was tattooed with a blue anchor.</p>
<p>As a matter of fact it was not a ball; there had merely been a dinner,
and afterwards there was dancing.</p>
<p>A man with a decoration was standing in front of him.</p>
<p>“You don’t dance, Mr. Fant?” he inquired.</p>
<p>Fant replied, “I’ve just been dancing with Miss Gabel.”</p>
<p>But as he said this, he felt that he blushed. Why should he have added
“with Miss Gabel.” It was surely a matter of indifference with whom he
had danced. Because he believed he had said something stupid, he was
annoyed with the man to whom he had said it, and set to staring at his
decoration without saying anything. Since this was a bogus foreign
decoration of the worst sort, the man grew embarrassed, coughed drily,
and passed on.</p>
<p>Fant remained seated and stared into a mirror which faced him on an
oblique wall. But it was not himself that he saw in the mirror, it was
the flooding light of the dancing hall and the sinuous lines of the
women. They seemed to move silently in time with the music. Look at
their red lips, look at the white curves of their arms!—</p>
<p>There she was again! For the third time she glided past across the
mirror. It was her cousin she was dancing with, a boy, lately a
student—ah, well!</p>
<p>No, he could not sit still, he could not look on any more. It surely
signified nothing that the boy danced with his own cousin, but he could
not look on. He rose and went out of the room.</p>
<p>Someone asked, “Who is this Mr. Fant?”</p>
<p>“He has invented something—a gas-burner, I believe. He is already on
the way to make a fortune.”</p>
<p>“But did you see,” said the man with the foreign order, “did you see
that he has a blue anchor tattooed on one hand?”</p>
<p>They suddenly burst into guffaws.</p>
<h4>II</h4>
<p>He sauntered back and forth through the rooms. He went out into the
corridor. A couple of Knights of Vasa were sitting on the wood-box
talking about business while they gesticulated with two big cigars, on
which they had left the labels. They grew silent as he passed.</p>
<p>He came into a greenish room that was half dark. From the roof on a
narrow cord hung a single electric light, its glow shaded by blue and
green fringes. On a dressing-table with a marble top an old Chinese
mandarin of porcelain sat sleeping on his crossed legs.</p>
<p>How strangely far off the music sounded, as if from underneath!</p>
<p>He set the mandarin’s head in motion with a little punch of his little
finger. Two mirrors repeated in unending succession the pale and
lethargic nods of the yellow head.</p>
<p>Now it was quiet, the music.</p>
<p>All at once she stood there, in the middle of the room. He had not heard
her enter. She held out both hands to him. He took them and drew her to
him for a kiss, but she freed herself almost immediately.
<p>“Somebody’s coming,” she said.</p>
<p>They listened. Voices approached and moved away again.</p>
<p>When all was quiet around them, he pressed her to him in a long kiss.
And he thought while she kissed him: This is life! This is eternity!</p>
<p>Far away in the green darkness nodded the pale head of the mandarin.</p>
<p>“No one kisses like you,” he muttered.</p>
<p>“Many kiss like you,” she responded, smiling.</p>
<p>He thought to himself: she’s smiling so that I shall know she’s jesting
and that she has never kissed anyone else.</p>
<p>While he caressed her two small hands between his, he noticed that she
was looking at his left hand.</p>
<p>“You are looking at the anchor,” he said. “It’s true that it is not
handsome. And it won’t come off.”</p>
<p>She took his hand and surveyed inquisitively the blue dots that formed
an anchor. But she said nothing.</p>
<p>“It was in Hamburg that was done,” he said. “I was a ship’s boy on a
vessel. We had come ashore and gone into a tavern by the harbor. I
remember it all so well: the fog, the many masts in the harbor, and the
smell of the grease. My comrades were tattooed, on the hands, arms and
body, and they thought I ought to have myself tattooed also. I couldn’t
refuse, or they would have thought I was afraid of the pain, for it hurt
a great deal. But I thought, too, it was stylish; I was hardly fourteen,
you know.”</p>
<p>“Are you tattooed on the body as well?” she asked.</p>
<p>Smilingly and somewhat unwillingly he answered, “Yes, I have on the
breast a ship and a bird, which is supposed to be an eagle, though it’s
more like a rooster.”</p>
<p>She looked long into his eyes, then slowly raised his hand to her lips
and kissed the blue anchor.</p>
<h4>III</h4>
<p>Years passed, and one day Richard Fant said to his wife as they were
dressing to go out to dinner, “Do you know, I think the blue anchor is
beginning to fade. Perhaps it’s on the way to vanish entirely.”</p>
<p>“Oh, it’s not as bad as that,” she answered.</p>
<p>In reality her thoughts were in another direction. She was thinking of
her cousin, Tom Gabel, who was an attaché at the embassy in Madrid. He
had now been home for two months on a visit and had promised to come and
fetch them so as to go together to the dinner.</p>
<p>“Hurry up,” she said, “so that Tom won’t have to wait for you.”</p>
<p>“I’m all ready,” he replied.</p>
<p>He had sat down in a corner in the shadow, fully dressed. She turned and
scanned his attire.</p>
<p>“You’ve forgotten your decoration,” she remarked.</p>
<p>“I don’t want my decoration,” he responded.</p>
<p>“But Richard! could you be so discourteous to Tom, who got it for you?”</p>
<p>He went after his decoration. It was not one of the very worst, not an
order of Christus or a Nichan Iftikar; it was a medium good decoration,
a quite nice decoration. He fastened it on the lapel of his coat with
the feeling that perhaps he really needed it, seeing that he had a blue
anchor on his left hand.</p>
<h4>IV</h4>
<p>There was a dance after the dinner, but Fant remained sitting in a sofa
corner of the smoking-room. By his side sat the man whom he had formerly
annoyed by staring at his foreign decoration, but he was now a Knight
Commander. They had become good friends and called each other by their
first names when they said anything to each other, but they said
nothing. They merely sat each in his corner of the sofa and smoked big
cigars with labels and understood each other perfectly.</p>
<p>The doctors had forbidden Fant to smoke strong cigars, because he had a
bad heart. But he had just lighted the third since dinner.</p>
<p>In the mirror on the middle of the opposite wall he saw the revolving of
the dancers and the flood of light from the hall. He had often wondered
how it was that they seemed to dance as though on felt or soft
greensward, soundlessly. He understood now that it came from his seeing
them in the mirror. Because the picture struck him from another quarter
than the clatter and the music, he did not connect them, and over the
flooring reflected in the mirror the dance appeared to go without noise.
Look at the girls’ white dresses! behold their panting bosoms!——</p>
<p>He recollected that he had once seen her who was now his wife float
past, as they did, in a girl’s plain white ball-dress. She was
differently clad now.</p>
<p>See! there she was, sure enough, with him, her cousin. She remained
standing a moment in the doorway, erect, slender, and delicate as
always. She seemed as if quite naked under the stiff, variegated silk in
which she had wrapped her body, and which was only held together by
clasps at the shoulders and waist. They bent their heads together and
whispered.</p>
<p>No, he must move about a bit, stretch his legs a little.—It is not good
to sit still too long after a big dinner and smoke three black cigars.
<p>He lighted the fourth and began to saunter back and forward through the
room.</p>
<p>He went out into the corridor. Three young men with white flowers in
their button-holes sat on the wood-box with cigarettes in holders and
talked about women, but they became silent as he went past. He opened
the door to the little green cabinet and went in. It was empty. He set
the mandarin’s yellow head in motion with a push of his knuckle and
passed on to the window.</p>
<p>The window-pane breathed frost and wintry chill. He blew on it till
there was a peep-hole between the ice-flowers, put his eye to the glass,
and looked out. The sky was dark and glittering with stars. Highest up
stood the Dipper with its handle aloft.</p>
<p>It was late, then.</p>
<p>He could not force himself to leave the room, because he felt a bitter
and devouring desire for his wife and the kiss of old times, the kiss
under the blue-green light from pearl fringe of the single electric
light, the kiss which the mandarin had beheld in his nodding
half-slumber. If she would only come now, precisely now! No one could
kiss as she did, no one. He had kissed other women since she no longer
loved him; but he had forgotten them all, he would not recognize them if
he met them on the street. If she would only come! Yes, even if she but
came to meet the other, even then he would take her forced and
treacherous kiss as a boon, even then—</p>
<p>He listened. Whispering voices were audible outside the door, but they
grew silent all at once and remained so.</p>
<p>He had a strange sensation at his heart, he felt that in a couple of
seconds he would lie stretched on the carpet, unconscious, but he held
himself upright, and suddenly he heard from the entry where the young
men were smoking their cigarettes a very clear voice which said: “Well,
after all it’s only natural. One can’t expect her to be in love with
someone who has a blue anchor tattooed on his hand.”</p>
<h4>V</h4>
<p>The coffin stood in the middle of the room. The black-clad woman walked
back and forth, back and forth.</p>
<p>“No, he’s not coming——”</p>
<p>When he finally did come, he said, “Pardon me, beloved. I was delayed by
someone who came to call——”</p>
<p>She nodded stiffly. She did not believe him, because he had not kissed
her.</p>
<p>When he felt that they had stood too long silent, he said, “I must be
off tomorrow. I’ve had a telegram from the minister.—But I swear to
you that I’ll come back,” he added in a somewhat lowered voice as if he
did not wish that the dead man should hear.</p>
<p>She comprehended that he was lying and that he never meant to see her
again. And she nodded.</p>
<p>“Good-bye,” she said.</p>
<p>When he had gone, she went forward to the head of the coffin and looked
at the dead man without thinking any further, for she was too weary. But
as she stood there she remembered suddenly that she had loved him. She
had loved other men too, but it came to her now that she had loved this
one most. At that thought she felt the tears rise from deep down in her
heart; she took his left hand, the one with the blue anchor, and wetted
it with her kisses and her tears.
<h3><a id="THE_KISS"/>THE KISS</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">T</span>HERE was once a young girl and a very young man. They sat on a stone on
a promontory that ran out into the lake, and the waves splashed at their
feet. They sat silent, each wrapped in thought, and watched the sun go
down.</p>
<p><i>He</i> thought that he should very much like to kiss her. When he looked
at her mouth, it occurred to him that this was just what it was meant
for. He had, to be sure, seen girls prettier than she was, and he was
really in love with someone else; but this other he could surely never
kiss, because she was an ideal, a star, and what availed “the desire of
the moth for the star”?</p>
<p><i>She</i> thought that she should very much like to have him kiss her, so
that she might have occasion to be downright angry with him and show how
deeply she despised him. She would get up, pull her skirts tightly round
her, give him a glance brimmed with icy contempt, and go off, erect and
calm, without any unnecessary haste. But in order that he might not
divine what she thought, she asked in a low, soft voice, “Do you think
there is another life after this?”</p>
<p>He thought it would be easier to kiss her if he said yes. But he could
not remember for certain what he might have said on other occasions
about the same subject, and he was afraid of contradicting himself. He
therefore looked her deep in the eyes and answered, “There are times
when I think so.”</p>
<p>This answer pleased her extraordinarily, and she thought: At least I
like his hair—and his forehead, too. It’s only a pity his nose is so
ugly, and then of course he has no standing—he’s just a student who is
reading for his examinations. That was not the sort of beau to vex her
friends with.</p>
<p>He thought: Now I can certainly kiss her. He was, nevertheless, terribly
afraid; he had never before kissed a girl of good family, and he
wondered if it might not be dangerous. Her father was lying asleep in a
hammock a little way off, and he was the mayor of the town.</p>
<p>She thought: Perhaps it will be still better if I give him a box on the
ear when he kisses me.</p>
<p>And she thought again: Why doesn’t he kiss me? Am I so ugly and
disagreeable?</p>
<p>She leaned forward over the water to see her reflection, but her image
was broken by the splashing of the water.</p>
<p>She thought again: I wonder how it will feel when he kisses me. As a
matter of fact she had only been kissed once, by a lieutenant after a
ball at the town hotel. He had smelt so abominably of punch and cigars
that she had felt but little flattered, although to be sure he was a
lieutenant, but otherwise she had not much cared for the kiss.
Furthermore she hated him because he had not been attentive to her
afterwards or indeed shown any interest in her at all.</p>
<p>While they sat so, each engrossed in private thoughts, the sun went down
and it grew dark.</p>
<p>And he thought: Seeing that she is still sitting with me, though the sun
is gone and it has become dark, it may be that she wouldn’t so much
object to my kissing her.</p>
<p>Then he laid his arm softly around her neck.</p>
<p>She had not expected this at all. She had imagined he would merely kiss
her and nothing more, and with that she would give him a box on the ear
and go off like a princess. Now she didn’t know what she should do; she
wanted of course to be angry with him, but at the same time she didn’t
want to lose the kiss. She therefore sat quite still.</p>
<p>Thereupon he kissed her.</p>
<p>It felt much more strange than she had supposed. She felt that she was
growing pale and faint, she entirely forgot that she was to give him a
box on the ear and that he was only a student reading for his
examination.
<p>But he thought of a passage in a book by a religious physician on “The
Sex Life of Woman,” which read: “One must guard against letting the
marital embrace come under the dominion of sensuality.” And he thought
that this must be very difficult to guard against, if even a kiss could
do so much.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>When the moon came up, they were still sitting there and kissing.</p>
<p>She whispered into his ear: “I loved you from the first hour I saw you.”</p>
<p>And he replied: “There has never been anyone in the world for me but
you.”</p>
<h3><a id="THE_DREAM_OF_ETERNITY"/>THE DREAM OF ETERNITY</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">W</span>HILE I was still very young I believed with entire certainty that I had
an immortal soul. I regarded this as a holy and precious gift and was
both happy and proud over it.</p>
<p>I often said to myself: “The life I am living is a dark and troubled
dream. Some time I shall awaken to another dream which stands closer to
reality and has a deeper meaning than this. Out of that dream I shall
awaken to a third and afterwards to a fourth, and every new dream will
stand nearer the truth than the one before. This approaching toward
truth constitutes the meaning of life, which is subtle and profound.”</p>
<p>With the joy of knowing that in my immortal soul I possessed a capital
which could not be lost in play or distrained upon for debt, I carried
on a dissipated life and squandered like a prince both what was mine and
what was not mine.</p>
<p>But one evening I found myself with some of my cronies in a large hall,
which glittered with gilt and electric light, while from its flooring
rose a smell of decay. Two young girls with painted faces and an old
woman whose wrinkles were filled with plaster were dancing there on a
platform, accompanied by the wail of the orchestra, cries of applause,
and the clink of broken glass. We watched the women, drank a great deal,
and conversed on the immortality of the soul.</p>
<p>“It’s foolish,” said one of my comrades who was older than I, “it’s
foolish to believe that it would be a blessing to have an immortal soul.
Look at that old harridan dancing there, whose head and hands tremble if
she stays still a moment. One sees directly that she is wicked and ugly
and entirely worthless, and that she’s getting more and more so every
day. How ridiculous it would be to imagine that she had an immortal
soul! But the case is just the same with you and me and all of us. What
a mean joke it would be to give us immortality!”</p>
<p>“The thing that I dislike most in what you say,” I answered, “isn’t that
you deny the immortality of the soul, but the fact that you find a
pleasure in denying it. Human beings are like children that play in a
garden surrounded by a high wall. Time and again a door is opened in the
wall, and one of the children disappears through the door. People then
tell them that it is taken to another garden bigger and more beautiful
than this, whereupon they listen a moment in silence and afterwards
continue to play among the flowers. Assume now that one of the boys is
more inquisitive than the others and climbs up on the wall so as to see
where his comrades go, and when he comes down again tells the rest what
he has seen; namely, that outside the gate sits a giant who devours the
children when they are taken out. And they all have to be taken out
through the gate in due turn! You are that boy, Martin, and I find it
unspeakably ridiculous that you tell what you think you’ve seen, not in
a spirit of despair, but as if you were proud and glad of knowing more
than the rest.”</p>
<p>“The younger of those girls is very pretty,” replied Martin.</p>
<p>“It’s dreadful to be annihilated, and it’s also dreadful not to be able
to be annihilated,” remarked another of my friends.</p>
<p>Martin continued this line of argument.</p>
<p>“Yes,” he said, “one should be able to find a middle course. Gird up
your loins and go out to look for a midway degree between time and
eternity. He who finds it may found a new religion, for he’ll then have
the most enticing bait that a fisher of men ever possessed.”</p>
<p>The orchestra stopped with a clash. The gold of the hall glittered more
faintly through the tobacco smoke and through the floor boards pressed
continuously a smell of decay.</p>
<p>The party broke up and we separated, each in his own direction. I
wandered a long while back and forth on the streets; I came upon streets
which I did not recognize and which I have never seen since, remarkably
desolate and empty streets, where the houses seemed to open their lines
to give me space whithersoever I turned my steps, and then to close up
again behind my back. I did not know where I had got to, before all of a
sudden I stood in front of my own door. It stood wide open. I went in
through the door and up the stairs. At one of the stair windows I
stopped and looked at the moon: I had not previously noticed that there
was moonlight that evening.</p>
<p>But I have never either before or after seen the moon look so. One could
not say that it shone. It was ashen-gray and pallid and unnaturally big.
I stood a long while and stared at yonder moon, despite the fact that I
was dreadfully tired and longed to get to sleep.</p>
<p>I lived in the third story. When I had gone up two flights I thanked God
there was only one left. But as I came up this flight, it struck me that
the corridor was not dark, as it had always used to be, but faintly
lighted like the other corridors where the moon glimmered in through the
stair windows. But there were only three flights of stairs in the house
besides the attic stairs; for that reason the uppermost corridor was
always dark.
<p>“The door of the attic is open,” I said to myself. “The light is coming
from the attic stairway. It’s unexcusable of the servants to leave the
door of the attic open, for thieves might get up into the attic.”</p>
<p>But there was no attic door. There was only an ordinary stairway like
the others.</p>
<p>I had counted wrong, then; I had still a flight to go up.</p>
<p>But when I had mounted this flight and stood in the corridor, I had to
control myself so as not to shriek aloud. For this corridor, too, was
light, neither was there any attic door open, but a new stairway led up
just as before. Through the stair window the moon glimmered in, and it
was ashen-gray and lustreless and unnaturally big.</p>
<p>I rushed up the stairway. I could no longer think. I tottered up
another, and yet another; I did not count them any longer.</p>
<p>I wanted to cry out, I wanted to wake that accursed house and see human
beings around me; but my throat was constricted.</p>
<p>Suddenly it occurred to me to try if I could read the names on the
door-plates. What kind of people could it be that lived in this tower of
Babel? The moonlight was too faint; I struck a match and held it close
to a brass plate.</p>
<p>I read there the name of one of my friends who was dead.
<p>Then the bonds of my tongue were loosed and I shrieked: “Help! help!
help!”</p>
<p> </p>
<p>That cry was my salvation, for it waked me up out of the terrible dream
of eternity.
<h3><a id="THE_DRIZZLE"/>THE DRIZZLE</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">A</span>UTUMN is here again with its dismal days, and the sun is hiding himself
in the darkest corner of the heavens so that no one shall see how pale
and aged and worn he has grown in this latter time. But while the wind
whistles in the window-chinks and the rain purls in the rain-spouts and
a wet dog howls in front of a closed gate down below on the street and
before the fire has burned down in our tile stove, I will tell you a
story about the drizzle.</p>
<p>Listen now!</p>
<p>For some time back the good God had become so angered over the
wickedness of men that he resolved to punish them by making them still
wickeder. He should, in his great goodness, have liked above all things
to have drowned them all together in a new Deluge: he had not forgotten
how agreeable was the sight when all living creatures perished in the
flood. But unfortunately in a sentimental moment he had promised Noah
never to do so again.</p>
<p>“Harken, my friend!” he therefore said to the Devil one day. “You are
assuredly no saint, but occasionally you have good ideas, and one can
talk things over with you. The children of men are wicked and do not
want to improve. My patience, which is infinite, has now come to an end,
and I have resolved to punish them by making them wickeder still. The
fact is I hope they will then collectively destroy each other and
themselves. It occurs to me that our interests—otherwise so far
apart—should here for once find a point of contact. What advice can you
give me?”</p>
<p>The Devil bit the end of his tail reflectively.</p>
<p>“Lord,” he answered finally, “Thy wisdom is as great as Thy goodness.
Statistics show that the greatest number of crimes are committed in the
autumn, when the days are dismal, the sky is gray, and the earth is
enveloped in rain and mist.”</p>
<p>The good God pondered these words a long while.</p>
<p>“I understand,” he said finally. “Your advice is good, and I will follow
it. You have good gifts, my friend, but you should make better use of
them.”</p>
<p>The Devil smiled and wagged his tail, for he was flattered and touched.
He then limped home.</p>
<p>But the good God said to himself: “Hereafter it shall always drizzle.
The clouds shall never clear; the mist never lift, the sun never shine
more. It shall be dark and gray to the end of time.”</p>
<p>The umbrella makers and the overshoes manufacturers were happy at the
start, but it was not long before the smile froze upon even their lips.
People do not know what importance fair weather has for them until they
are for once compelled to do without it. The gay became melancholy. The
melancholy became mad and hanged themselves in long rows or assembled to
hold prayer-meetings. Soon no one worked any more, and the need became
great. Crime increased in a dizzying scale; the prisons were
overcrowded, the madhouses afforded room for only the clever. The number
of the living decreased, and their dwellings stood deserted. They
instituted capital punishment for suicide; nothing did any good.</p>
<p>Mankind, who for so many generations had dreamed and poetized about an
eternal spring, now went to meet their last days through an eternal
autumn.</p>
<p>Day by day the destruction went on. Countrysides were laid waste, cities
fell in ruins. Dogs gathered in the squares and howled; but in the
alleys an old lame man went about from house to house with a sack on his
back and collected souls. And every evening he limped home with his sack
full.</p>
<p>But one evening he did not limp home. He went instead to the gate of
heaven and straight on to the good God’s throne. There he stood still,
bowed, and said:</p>
<p>“Lord, Thou hast aged in these latter days. We have both of us aged, and
it is for that reason we are so dull. Ah! Lord, that was bad advice I
gave Thee. The sins that interest me need a bit of sunlight once in a
while in order to flourish. Look here! you’ve made me into a miserable
rubbish-gatherer.”</p>
<p>With these words he flung his dirty sack so violently against the steps
of the throne that the cord broke and the souls fluttered out. They were
not black, but gray.</p>
<p>“That’s the last of the human souls,” said the Devil. “I give them to
Thee, Lord. But beware of using them, if Thou intendest to create a new
world!”</p>
<p> </p>
<p>The wind whistles in the window chinks, the rain purls in the
rain-spouts, and the story is done. He who has not understood it may
console himself with the thought that it will be fair weather tomorrow.
<h3><a id="THE_DRAWING_IN_INDIA_INK"/>THE DRAWING IN INDIA INK</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">O</span>NE day in April many years ago, in the time when I still wondered about
the meaning of life, I went into a little cigar booth on a back street
to buy a cigar. I selected a dark and angular El Zelo, stuffed it into
my case, paid for it, and made ready to go. But at that moment it
occurred to me to show the young girl who stood in the booth, and of
whom I used often to buy my cigars, a little sketch in India ink, which
I happened to have lying in a portfolio. I had got it from a young
artist, and to my thinking it was very fine.</p>
<p>“Look here,” said I, handing it to her. “What do you think of that?”</p>
<p>She took it in her hand with interested curiosity and looked at it very
long and closely. She turned it in various directions, and her face took
on an expression of strained mental activity.</p>
<p>“Well, what does it mean?” she asked finally with an inquisitive glance.</p>
<p>I was a little surprised.</p>
<p>“It doesn’t mean anything in particular,” I answered. “It’s just a
landscape. That’s the ground and that’s the sky and that there is a
road—an ordinary road——”</p>
<p>“Yes, I can see that,” she interrupted in a somewhat unfriendly tone;
“but I want to know what it <i>means</i>.”</p>
<p>I stood there embarrassed and irresolute; I had never happened to think
that it ought to mean anything. But her idea was not to be removed; she
had now got it into her head that the picture must be some sort of
“Where is the cat?” affair. Why otherwise should I have shown it to her?
At last she set it up against the window-pane so as to make it
transparent. Presumably someone had once shown her a peculiar kind of
playing card, which in an ordinary light represents a nine of diamonds
or a knave of spades, but which, when one holds it up against the light,
displays something indecent.</p>
<p>But her investigation brought no result. She gave back the sketch, and I
prepared to leave. Then all at once the poor girl grew very red in the
face and burst out, with a sob in her throat:</p>
<p>“Shame on you! it’s real mean of you to make a fool of me like that. I
know very well I’m a poor girl, and haven’t been able to get myself a
better education, but still you don’t need to make a fool of me. Can’t
you tell me what your picture means?”</p>
<p>What was I to answer? I should have given much to be able to tell her
what it meant; but I could not, for it meant precisely nothing.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>Ah, well, that was many years ago. I now smoke other cigars, which I buy
in another shop, and I no longer wonder about the meaning of life—but
that is not because I think I have found it.
<h3><a id="THE_WAGES_OF_SIN"/>THE WAGES OF SIN</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">T</span>HIS is the story of a young girl and an apothecary with a white vest.</p>
<p>She was young and slim, she smelled of pine woods and heather, and her
complexion was sunburned and a trifle freckled. So she was when I knew
her. But the apothecary was a quite ordinary apothecary; he wore a white
vest on Sundays, and on a Sunday this attracted attention. It attracted
attention in a place in the country so far away from the world that no
one in that region was so sophisticated as to wear a white vest on
Sundays except the apothecary.</p>
<p>This, you see, was how it happened that one Sunday morning there was a
knock at my door, and when I opened it, the apothecary stood outside in
his white vest and bowed several times. He was very polite and very much
embarrassed.</p>
<p>“I beg your most humble pardon,” he said, “but Miss Erika was here
yesterday with her sisters while you were away, and when she went, she
left her poetry book for you and me to write something in it. Here it
is. But I don’t know at all what to write. Could you perhaps
kindly——?” And he bowed again several times.</p>
<p>“We will think the matter over,” I answered in a friendly tone.</p>
<p>I took the book therefore and for my own share inscribed a translation
of “Du bist wie eine Blume,” which I had made myself and which I always
use for that purpose. I then began to search among my papers to see if
by any chance I had some old verses from my school days which would suit
for the apothecary. Finally I came upon the following bad poem:</p>
<div class="poetry">
<div class="poem"><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">You set my thoughts in turmoil,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">I wither in longing’s blight.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">In solitude you haunt me,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">I dreamed of you in the night.<br/></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I dreamed that we walked together<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Side by side in the twilight dim,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And through your lowered lashes<br/></span>
<span class="i0">I saw the bright tear swim.<br/></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">I kissed your cheek and your eyelids,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">I saw the tear-drop fall,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">But oh, your red, red lips, love—<br/></span>
<span class="i0">I kissed them most of all.<br/></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">One cannot always dream sweetly.<br/></span>
<span class="i0">Small rest since then have I known,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">For, sorrowful oft and weary,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">I watch through the night-hours alone.<br/></span>
</div><div class="stanza">
<span class="i0">Alas! your cheeks so soft, love,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">I touch but with glances trist,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">And those red lips, my darling,<br/></span>
<span class="i0">I never, never have kissed.<br/></span>
</div></div>
</div>
<p>I showed the apothecary this poem and offered to let him use it. He read
it through attentively twice and blushed all over with delight.</p>
<p>“Did you really write that yourself?” he inquired in his simplicity of
heart.</p>
<p>“Yes, I’m sorry to admit.”</p>
<p>He thanked me very warmly for the permission to use the poem, and when
he went out of the room I imagine we both had the feeling that we must
drop the formality of “mister” at the first opportunity.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>That evening there was a little party at the girl’s house. Young folks
were there. We drank cherry syrup on a veranda festooned with hop-vines.</p>
<p>I sat and looked at the young girl.</p>
<p>No, she was not like herself. Her eyes were bigger and more restless
than usual and her mouth was redder. And she could not sit still on her
chair.</p>
<p>From time to time she cast a furtive glance at me, but more often she
looked at the apothecary. And the apothecary looked that evening like a
turkey-cock.
<p>When the punch was passed around, we dropped the “mister.”</p>
<p> </p>
<p>We young people went down on the meadow to play games. We tossed rings
and played other games, and meanwhile the sun went down behind the hills
and it grew dark.</p>
<p>We had laid the rings and the sword in a heap on the ground and were now
standing in groups, whispering and smiling, while the dusk came on. But
the young girl came up to me through the dusk and took me aside behind a
shed.</p>
<p>“You must answer me a question,” said she. “Did the druggist really
write his verses himself?” Her voice trembled, and she tried to look
away as she spoke.</p>
<p>“Yes,” I said. “He wrote them last night. I heard him going back and
forth in his room all night.”</p>
<p>But when I had said that, I felt a sting in my conscience, for I saw
that she was a pretty and lovable child and that it was a great sin to
deceive her so.</p>
<p>Who knows, I said to myself, who knows? Perhaps this is the sin of which
the Scripture says that it cannot be forgiven.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>The twilight deepened, it became night, and a star burned between the
trees in the wood, where we were walking in pairs.
<p>But I was alone.</p>
<p>I do not remember any more where I went that evening. I separated from
the others and went deeper into the wood.</p>
<p>But deep within the wood among the firs I saw a birch with a shining
white stem. By the stem stood two young people kissing, and I saw that
one of them was the young girl who smelled of pine woods and heather.
But the other was the apothecary, and he was a quite ordinary apothecary
with a white vest. He held her pressed against the white stem of the
birch and kissed her.</p>
<p>But when he had kissed her three times, I went away and wept bitterly.
<h3><a id="COMMUNION"/>COMMUNION</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">I</span>T happened when I was hardly more than a boy.</p>
<p>It was on a blustering autumn evening on board a coast steamer. We had
not yet come in from the country, and I had to go in and out of town to
school. I had been lazy as usual and was to be examined in several
subjects in order to be promoted into a higher class.</p>
<p>I went back and forward on the deck in the darkness, with collar turned
up and hands in my coat pockets, thinking of my reverses at school. I
was almost sure to flunk. As I leaned forward over the railing and saw
how the foam hissed whitely and the starboard lantern threw sparkling
green reflections on the black water, I felt tempted to jump overboard.
Then at least the mathematics teacher would be sorry for the way he had
tormented me—then, when it was too late——</p>
<p>But in the end it grew cold outside, and when I thought I had been
freezing long enough, I went into the smoking cabin.</p>
<p>In my imagination I can still see the warm, comfortable interior which
met my view when I opened the door. The lighted ceiling-lamp swung
slowly back and forth like a pendulum. On the table steamed four whiskey
toddies, four cigars puffed, and four gentlemen were telling smutty
stories. I recognized them all as neighbors of our summer sojourn: a
company director, an old clergyman, a leading actor, and a button
dealer. I bowed politely and threw myself down in a corner. I had, to be
sure, a slight feeling that my presence might perhaps be superfluous;
but on the other hand it would have been asking too much of me to go out
into the wind and freeze when there was so much room in the cabin.
Furthermore I knew within myself that I might very well contribute to
the entertainment if necessary.</p>
<p>The four men looked askance at me with a certain coolness, and there was
a pause.</p>
<p>I was sixteen and had recently been confirmed. People have told me that
at that time I had a guileless and innocent appearance.</p>
<p>The pause, however, was not long. A few swallows from the glasses, a few
puffs at the cigars, and the exchange of opinions was once more in full
swing. A peculiar circumstance struck me, though: all the stories that
were told I had already heard innumerable times, and for my part I found
them comparatively flat. Smutty stories may, as is well known, be
divided into two chief groups, one of which concentrates itself mostly
about digestive processes and circumstances related to them, whereas, on
the contrary, the other, which stands incomparably higher in degree, has
preferably to do with woman. I and my schoolmates had long since left
the former group behind us; I was therefore the more surprised to hear
these mature gentlemen give it their liveliest interest, while the
other, much more appealing group was passed over in silence. I did not
understand it. Could this possibly be out of any undue consideration for
me? I need not say to what extent the suspicion of such a thing provoked
me. The lively tone of the cabin had affected me and made me
venturesome, so that I resolved to put an end to this childishness.</p>
<p>“Look here, uncle,” I burst out quite impulsively during a silence after
a story which was so harmless that even the clergyman guffawed at it,
“don’t you remember the story the captain told day before yesterday?”</p>
<p>“Uncle” was the company director, who was a friend of my father.</p>
<p>I continued undismayed: “That was the choicest I’ve heard in all my
days. Couldn’t you please tell it?”</p>
<p>Four pairs of astonished eyes were directed upon me, and a painful
silence set in. I already regretted my rash courage.</p>
<p>The company director broke the ice with a skittish little chuckle,
which was but a faint echo of the thunder he had allowed to roll out a
couple of days before when the captain had told the story.</p>
<p>“Tee-hee!—yes, that wasn’t so bad——”</p>
<p>He then began to tell it. It was very highly seasoned and had to do with
woman.</p>
<p>The leading actor at first hid his feelings behind his customary mask of
dignified seriousness, whereas on the other hand the button dealer, an
old buck who had grown gray in sin, regarded me with a sort of furtive
interest, in which was an element of increased respect for my
personality.</p>
<p>But when the anecdote began to take a somewhat precarious turn, it was
suddenly interrupted by the clergyman, a kindly old man with a pious and
childlike expression on his elderly smooth-shaven countenance.</p>
<p>“Pardon the interruption, my good brother, but”—and he turned a little
in his chair so that he could direct his words at me—“how old, may I
ask, is this young man? Has he been to Our Lord’s—to Communion?”</p>
<p>I felt that I flushed blood-red. I had forgotten that there was a
clergyman in the company.</p>
<p>“Y-yes,” I stammered almost inaudibly. “I was confirmed last winter.”</p>
<p>“Indeed!” returned the old clergyman, while he slowly stirred his glass
of toddy.
<p>Then without looking up, in a voice which forty years of mediation
between God and the world had impressed with the mild tone of tolerance
and indulgence, he continued:</p>
<p>“Go on, my dear brother! Excuse the interruption!”</p>
<h3><a id="THE_CLOWN"/>THE CLOWN</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">Y</span>ESTERDAY a familiar face flitted by me on the street. It was pale and
had a tired expression, but the features were sharp and strongly marked.</p>
<p>I did not recall his name. I was sure I had seen him sometime, perhaps a
long while ago, but I could not remember when or under what
circumstances. His face had aroused my interest without my being able to
explain why, and I dug all sorts of old recollections out of the
junk-room of my memory in order to identify him, but in vain.</p>
<p>In the evening I was at the theatre. There to my surprise I found him
again on the stage in a minor rôle. He was but little disguised; I
recognized him at once and looked for his name on the program. I found
it, but it was unknown to me. I followed his acting with tense interest.
He took the part of a miserably stupid and ridiculous servant, whom
everybody made fun of. The rôle was as wretched as the piece, and he
played it mechanically and conventionally; but in certain intonations
his voice assumed a sharp and bitter character which did not belong to
the part.
<p>They re-echoed in my ear, those tones, till late into the night, as I
went back and forth in my room. And with their help I at last succeeded
in digging up the recollection with which they belonged. I discovered
that we had been schoolmates, but he was many years younger than I; when
I was in the highest class, he was in one of the lowest.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>When I was in the top class of the school, I was one day standing at the
window toward the end of a lunch recess. Recesses at the school were an
especial abomination of mine; I could never find anything to do. I knew
that I did not know my lesson, and I could not set myself to going over
it. The slight vexation I felt about the coming lesson always faded
before a greater: a vexation about life, a gnawing premonition that the
days to follow would be as empty and meaningless as those which had
passed.</p>
<p>So I was walking back and forth with my hands in my jacket pockets, now
and then stopping at the window, which was open. As I stood there, my
attention was caught by a peculiar occurrence which was taking place
down in the yard just below the window. A little boy in one of the
lowest classes, a lad of ten or eleven, lay stretched on his back,
surrounded by a crowd of other boys in a ring. Their faces, most of them
at any rate, had the expression of evil curiosity which children and
uncultured people do not know how to conceal. A little broad-shouldered
fellow with high cheekbones, who gave the impression of being very
strong for his age, stood in the ring with a whip in his hand.</p>
<p>“You are my slave,” he said to the boy on the ground, “aren’t you? Say:
‘I am your slave!’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>
<p>“I am your slave,” answered the child without hesitating; which
indicated that this was not the first time he had said it.</p>
<p>“Get up,” ordered the other.</p>
<p>The boy got up.</p>
<p>“Imitate B., the way he looks when he comes into class!”</p>
<p>B. was a teacher who went on crutches. The boy went a couple of steps
outside the ring, which opened to give him space; then he came back on
the improvised stage and executed as he did so the movements of a man
walking on crutches. He did his part very well; the illusion was
complete, and the onlookers applauded, but the little actor stood there
with a serious expression. He had a pallid little face and black
clothes; perhaps he had just lost his father or mother.</p>
<p>“Laugh!” ordered the other with a light flick of the whip which he had
in his hand.</p>
<p>The boy tried to obey, but it did not come easily. The laugh sounded
forced at the start, but it was not long before he succeeded in
laughing himself into a genuine, quite natural guffaw, and with that he
turned toward his “master,” as if it was at him that he laughed. But the
latter already desired to have his slave show off new accomplishments.</p>
<p>“Say: ‘My farsher is a damned scoundrel!’<span class="lftspc">”</span></p>
<p>The boy looked around the circle with a helpless glance. When he saw
that no one gave a semblance of wanting to help him, and that, on the
contrary, all stood in eager expectation of something really amusing, he
said as low as he dared:</p>
<p>“My farsher is a damned scoundrel.”</p>
<p>That drew unbounded applause.</p>
<p>“Laugh—Cry!”</p>
<p>The child began to simulate weeping, but with that he now came into the
mood he was ordered to imagine. The weeping stuck in his throat, and he
shed actual tears.</p>
<p>“Let him be!” said an older boy in the circle, “he’s crying in earnest.”</p>
<p>And with that the school bell rang.</p>
<p> </p>
<p>Some days afterwards he ran past me on the way from school. I noticed
that his jacket was ripped open in the back.</p>
<p>“Wait a bit!” I said to him, “your jacket has split open in the back.”</p>
<p>“No,” he said, “it hasn’t split open, they have cut it open with a
penknife.”</p>
<p>“Have they dirtied your book for you, too?” I asked.</p>
<p>“Yes, they’ve laid it in the gutter.”</p>
<p>“Why are they so mean to you?”</p>
<p>“I don’t know. They are stronger than I am.”</p>
<p>He knew of no other reason. But of course that was not the only one;
they must have found something in him that irritated them. I saw it in
him that he was not like the others. The exceptional, the divergent
always irritates children and mobs. A school-boy’s eccentricities are
punished by the teacher with a well-intended monition or a dry satiric
smile; but by his comrades they are punished with kicks and cuffs and a
bloody nose, with a torn jacket, a cap carefully laid under a
rain-spout, and his best book thrown into the gutter.</p>
<p>Well, he is an actor now; that was surely his natural predestination. He
now talks from the stage to a large public. It would be strange if
sometime he did not make his way; I believe he has talent. Perhaps he
will gradually transform his peculiarity to a pattern, according to
which others try to conform as to an inoffensive regular verb.
<h3><a id="SIGNY"/>SIGNY</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">S</span>IGNY was a little girl about as old as I, with a pink dress and a pink
ribbon in her hair. Her hair was dark, with curly locks, and she had
dark blue starry eyes with long lashes. She was not at all angelic. I
didn’t care a great deal for angels, perhaps in especial because they
always had fair hair. I had fair hair myself at that time, like most
children, and light hair wasn’t much, I thought.</p>
<p>But I thought an awful lot of Signy. I could go about thinking of her
for whole days. It was not seldom that she did something naughty, which
I was blamed for, and sometimes I myself took the blame voluntarily. I
cared no less for her on that account, but only wished that she would do
more naughty things and I get the blame for them. But what was that bit
of deviltry she hit upon? Let me think.—She ran off and hid somewhere
where we were forbidden to go, in some dangerous place where there might
be trolls and spooks. One time I remember clearly that she wheedled me
into playing with matches—playing with fire, the most dangerous and
most strictly forbidden thing there was. Didn’t she set fire to an old
dry bush in the garden? Why, to be sure she did; and I got the switch
from mother. Oh, how I cared for Signy. And sometimes she said words
that shouldn’t be said. The shivers went up and down my back, but I only
wanted her to say them again.</p>
<p>I don’t know just where she lived. It wasn’t in the same house as we
did; the other children whom I played with didn’t know her. But she must
have lived in the same street—I suppose—in a little home with a garden
surrounded by a fence. Or did she live in a garret cupola obliquely
across the street, with flowers on the window-sill?—I may just as well
say right out that she didn’t live anywhere. She existed only in my
imagination.</p>
<p>Signy was the first creation of my fancy, at least the first I can
recall. I was a good six or seven years old, and at the age (just as,
besides, at sixty, seventy or more) one often thinks aloud. To be brief,
I went about prattling to myself as I imagined things about Signy, and
one fine day it happened, of course, that my mother heard me.</p>
<p>“Listen to the boy,” she said to my father. “Listen how he goes around
talking to himself!”</p>
<p>And to me she said, “What is it you go around talking about? What are
you thinking about?”</p>
<p>Grown-ups have a terrible passion for asking children the most
inconsiderate questions. I ran off and hid.
<p>Another day it was the same story, and still another day. Pain and
embarrassment, questions that couldn’t be answered.</p>
<p>My father said to me, “Other children talk to themselves up to four and
five years old; you are too big for that.”</p>
<p>I perceived that things couldn’t go on any longer so; something must be
done. It occurred to me that it was the sibilant sound that betrayed me:
Signy, Signy; that wouldn’t do. So I changed Signy’s name to Ida. In
that way I succeeded in having her sometimes in peace, but Ida never
really got the same power of enchantment over me as Signy. One fine day
we became enemies, I quarreled with her and called her a silly girl, and
perhaps I even went so far as to scratch her. I regretted it to be sure
but wouldn’t ask her pardon, and soon after I let her go to the deuce.
At the same time I learned to think in silence—and with a few
exceptions have continued to do so.</p>
<p>But whence had I got Signy? In the same house with us lived a little
girl, with whom I sometimes played. Her mother was in the ballet, and
once she dressed herself in one of her mother’s ballet skirts. But she
was neither Signy nor Ida, she performed no deviltries and had none of
Signy’s magic power over my heart. I must, then, at the age of seven
have created Signy as the German creates a camel: out of the depths of
my consciousness.</p>
<p>Then, too, I was predestined.</p>
<p>After that the years rolled on, and my genuinely literary impulses
arrived, only quite late. The first strong urge came when one of my
schoolmates—it was the present Professor Almqvist at the Caroline
Institute—during a lesson in Mother Tongue declaimed with powerful
effect Viktor Rydberg’s “Flying Dutchman.” I became wild with enthusiasm
and for months afterwards dreamed of nothing else than being able at
some period in the remote future to write something equally fine.</p>
<p>So far I haven’t succeeded, but why should one give up hope?
<h3><a id="A_MASTERLESS_DOG"/>A MASTERLESS DOG</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">A</span> MAN died, and after he was dead no one looked after his black dog. The
dog mourned him long and bitterly. He did not, however, lie down to die
on his master’s grave; possibly because he did not know where it was;
possibly, too, because he was at bottom a young and happy dog, who
considered that there was still something left for him in life.</p>
<p>There are two kinds of dogs: dogs that have a master, and dogs that have
none. Outwardly the difference is not material; a masterless dog may be
as fat as others, often fatter. No, the difference lies in another
direction. Mankind is for dogs the infinite, providence. To obey a
master, to follow him, rely upon him—that is, so to speak, the meaning
of a dog’s existence. To be sure, he has not his master in his thoughts
every minute of the day, nor does he always follow close at his heels.
No, he often runs about of his own accord with business-like intent,
sniffs around the corners of houses, makes alliance with his kind,
snatches a bone, if it comes in his way, and concerns himself about
much. Yet on the instant that his master whistles, all this is out of
his canine head more quickly than the scourge drove the hucksters out of
the temple, for he knows that there is but one thing he must attend to.
So forgetting his house-corner and his bone and his companions, he
hurries to his master.</p>
<p>The dog whose master died without the dog’s knowing how, and who was
buried without the dog’s knowing where, mourned him long; but as the
days passed and nothing occurred to remind him of his master, he forgot
him. He no longer perceived the scent of his master’s footsteps on the
street where he lived. As he rolled about on a grass plot with a
comrade, it often happened that a whistle pierced the air, and in that
instant his comrade had vanished like the wind. Then he pricked up his
ears, but no whistle resembled his master’s. So he forgot him, and he
forgot still more: he forgot that he had ever had a master. He forgot
that there had ever been a time when he would not have regarded it as
possible for a dog to live without a master. He became what one would
call a dog that had seen better days, though it was in the inner meaning
of the expression, for outwardly he got along fairly well. He lived as a
dog does live: he now and then stole a good meal in the square, and got
beaten, and had love affairs, and lay down to sleep when he was tired.
He made friends and enemies. One day he thoroughly thrashed a dog that
was weaker than he, and another day he was badly handled by one that was
stronger. Early in the morning one might see him run out along his
master’s street, where out of habit he mostly continued to resort. He
ran straight forward with an air of having something important to attend
to; smelt in passing a dog that he met, but was not eager to follow up
the acquaintance; then continued his journey; but all at once sat down
and scratched himself behind the ear with intense energy. The next
moment he started up and flew right across the street to chase a red cat
down into a cellar window; whereupon, re-assuming his business manner,
he proceeded on his way and vanished around the corner.</p>
<p>So his day was spent. One year followed close in the track of another,
and he grew old without noticing it.</p>
<p>Then there came at last a gloomy evening. It was wet and cold, and now
and then there came a shower. The old dog had been all day on an
expedition down in the city. He walked slowly along the street, limping
a little; a couple of times he stood still and shook his black hide,
which with the years had become sprinkled with gray about the head and
neck. According to his wont he walked and sniffed, now to right, now to
left. He took an excursion in at a gateway, and when he came out had
another dog in his company. Next moment came a third. They were young
and sportive dogs that wanted to entice him to play, but he was in a bad
humor, and furthermore it began to sleet. Then a whistle pierced the
air, a long and sharp whistle. The old dog looked at both the young
ones, but they paid no attention; it was not one of their masters that
whistled. Then the old masterless dog pricked up his ears; he felt all
at once so strange. There was a fresh whistle, and the old dog sprang
irresolutely first to one side, then to the other. It was his master
that whistled, and he surely had to follow! For the third time someone
whistled, sharply and persistently as before. Where is he then, in what
direction? How could I have been separated from my master? And when did
it happen, yesterday or day before yesterday, or perhaps only a little
while ago? And what did my master look like, and what sort of smell had
he, and where is he, where is he? He sprang about and sniffed at all the
passers-by, but none of them was his master, and none wanted to be. Then
he turned and bounded along the street; at the corner he stood still and
looked around in all directions. His master was not there. Then he went
back down the street at a gallop; the mud spattered about him and the
rain dripped from his fur. He stood at all the corners, but nowhere was
his master. Then he sat down on his haunches at a street crossing,
stretched his shaggy head toward heaven, and howled.</p>
<p>Have you ever seen, have you ever heard such a forgotten, masterless
dog, when he stretches his neck toward heaven and howls, howls? The
other dogs slink softly away with their tails between their legs; for
they cannot comfort him and they cannot help him.
