<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Wages of Sin</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-wages-of-sin" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Wages of Sin</h2>
			<p>This is the story of a young girl and an apothecary with a white vest.</p>
			<p>She was young and slim, she smelled of pine woods and heather, and her complexion was sunburned and a trifle freckled. So she was when I knew her. But the apothecary was a quite ordinary apothecary; he wore a white vest on Sundays, and on a Sunday this attracted attention. It attracted attention in a place in the country so far away from the world that no one in that region was so sophisticated as to wear a white vest on Sundays except the apothecary.</p>
			<p>This, you see, was how it happened that one Sunday morning there was a knock at my door, and when I opened it, the apothecary stood outside in his white vest and bowed several times. He was very polite and very much embarrassed.</p>
			<p>“I beg your most humble pardon,” he said, “but Miss Erika was here yesterday with her sisters while you were away, and when she went, she left her poetry book for you and me to write something in it. Here it is. But I don’t know at all what to write. Could you perhaps kindly⁠—?” And he bowed again several times.</p>
			<p>“We will think the matter over,” I answered in a friendly tone.</p>
			<p>I took the book therefore and for my own share inscribed a translation of “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="de">Du bist wie eine Blume</span>,” which I had made myself and which I always use for that purpose. I then began to search among my papers to see if by any chance I had some old verses from my school days which would suit for the apothecary. Finally I came upon the following bad poem:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>You set my thoughts in turmoil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wither in longing’s blight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In solitude you haunt me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dreamed of you in the night.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I dreamed that we walked together</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Side by side in the twilight dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through your lowered lashes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the bright tear swim.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I kissed your cheek and your eyelids,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the teardrop fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oh, your red, red lips, love⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I kissed them most of all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One cannot always dream sweetly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small rest since then have I known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, sorrowful oft and weary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I watch through the night-hours alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! your cheeks so soft, love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I touch but with glances trist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those red lips, my darling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never, never have kissed.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I showed the apothecary this poem and offered to let him use it. He read it through attentively twice and blushed all over with delight.</p>
			<p>“Did you really write that yourself?” he inquired in his simplicity of heart.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I’m sorry to admit.”</p>
			<p>He thanked me very warmly for the permission to use the poem, and when he went out of the room I imagine we both had the feeling that we must drop the formality of “mister” at the first opportunity.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>That evening there was a little party at the girl’s house. Young folks were there. We drank cherry syrup on a veranda festooned with hop-vines.</p>
			<p>I sat and looked at the young girl.</p>
			<p>No, she was not like herself. Her eyes were bigger and more restless than usual and her mouth was redder. And she could not sit still on her chair.</p>
			<p>From time to time she cast a furtive glance at me, but more often she looked at the apothecary. And the apothecary looked that evening like a turkey-cock.</p>
			<p>When the punch was passed around, we dropped the “mister.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>We young people went down on the meadow to play games. We tossed rings and played other games, and meanwhile the sun went down behind the hills and it grew dark.</p>
			<p>We had laid the rings and the sword in a heap on the ground and were now standing in groups, whispering and smiling, while the dusk came on. But the young girl came up to me through the dusk and took me aside behind a shed.</p>
			<p>“You must answer me a question,” said she. “Did the druggist really write his verses himself?” Her voice trembled, and she tried to look away as she spoke.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” I said. “He wrote them last night. I heard him going back and forth in his room all night.”</p>
			<p>But when I had said that, I felt a sting in my conscience, for I saw that she was a pretty and lovable child and that it was a great sin to deceive her so.</p>
			<p>Who knows, I said to myself, who knows? Perhaps this is the sin of which the Scripture says that it cannot be forgiven.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>The twilight deepened, it became night, and a star burned between the trees in the wood, where we were walking in pairs.</p>
			<p>But I was alone.</p>
			<p>I do not remember any more where I went that evening. I separated from the others and went deeper into the wood.</p>
			<p>But deep within the wood among the firs I saw a birch with a shining white stem. By the stem stood two young people kissing, and I saw that one of them was the young girl who smelled of pine woods and heather. But the other was the apothecary, and he was a quite ordinary apothecary with a white vest. He held her pressed against the white stem of the birch and kissed her.</p>
			<p>But when he had kissed her three times, I went away and wept bitterly.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
